**********************************************
Implementing a geospatial database with Python
**********************************************

.. author:: Jarno Saarim√§ki
.. categories:: Python
.. tags:: NetCDF4, OSGeo

Introduction
============

When we model and optimize energy consumption of ships we typically
deal with large geospatial and temporal datasets.  For instance, most
commonly we need to find the values of various meteorological
forecasts along the whole of a vessel's route.  Such a route may span
across oceans and can take many days for a ship to complete.  Also, we
would like the data to be delivered on-board as fast as possible.
Suffice it to say, our production environment needs at least robust
and reliable storage of the data and effective access to it.

.. more::

We have decided to use a somewhat custom approach in our databases.
The base of our databases are `NetCDF4`_ files, from which data can be
extracted efficiently.  Initially we thought that there should exist
standard tools that would fit to our problems, but we were surprised
and disappointed to find out that this is not the case.  The biggest
caveat of existing tools seems to be that temporal dimension isn't at
level with spatial ones.  For us, the treatment of time should be in
many ways analogous to the treatment of spatial dimensions.

.. _`NetCDF4`: http://www.unidata.ucar.edu/software/netcdf/

In this post, we will show an example database implementation that
uses NetCDF4 files to store the data.  This highlights some of the
problems we have encountered and design choices we have made.

Before diving into the example, we will spend a little time explaining
the terminology and our data. If you just one want to see the code and
skip all the rambling, go to :ref:`code-example`.  After the code
example we will discuss briefly other tools we have investigated.


Short introduction to GIS concepts
==================================

Geospatial libraries usually use the terminology of GIS (Geographic
information systems), and we will also use it in this post.  In this
section two basic objects are discussed: *vector* and *raster*.
Examples of the objects can be found in visualizations of
:ref:`our-data`.

We are mostly concerned with raster data in our applications.  A
raster object can contain one or more matrices of equal size, where
each cell of a matrix corresponds to a patch, or a pixel, in some
geographical location.  The cell value can then be a physical quantity
like temperature, humidity, or elevation, at the corresponding
location.

In our data raster pixel locations are expressed in equally spaced
latitude and longitude values.  These latitude and longitude values
further correpond to a certain model of Earth, in our case `WGS84`_.

.. _`WGS84`: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/World_Geodetic_System

A raster can contain multiple bands, i.e., data matrices.  For
instance, if a raster only expresses a color value in each pixel,
there can be three bands, red, green, and blue.  Another example is
our sea current data, which contains north and east components.  The
two components could be expressed as their own bands.  However, in our
databases we have defined raster bands to express different time
instances.

Another key concept of GIS is an object called vector.  Vector is
referenced to fixed geographic points but not to pixels.  Vector can
also contain attributes to each point.  Typical examples of vector
features are roads, rivers, coastal lines, or boundaries of countries.
In our case the route of a ship can be considered as a vector feature.


.. _our-data:

Our data
========

This post focuses on forecast data of globally gridded simulation
values that describe different meteorological variables at sea.

Our data is typically downloaded on-board a ship at fixed time
intervals or when a ship visits a port.  It is only practical to
download that spatio-temporal subset of meteorological data which is
relevant for the ship's voyage.

One use case for our data is speed optimization in which the latitude
and longitude points of a route are known but exact time points are
variables in the optimization.  In other applications we may also wish
to optimize the route.  In this case also latitude and longitude
points are not fixed when the data is downloaded.  When we download
data from a database, there needs to be enough of it to cover
different use cases.

An example dataset is described below in three figures.  These
visualize forecast data of one variable at different levels.  `Figure
1`_ shows a close-up on what raster data looks like, and how spatial
points between pixel locations can be approximated with linear
interpolation.


.. figure:: few_pixels.png
   :align: center

   _`Figure 1`: Only a few pixels from a relative humidity raster.
   The right plot shows linearly interpolated pixel values.  A point of
   interest 'x' is plotted to highlight the problem of estimating a
   value in between pixel center points.

`Figure 2`_ views the raster data globally for one time instance.  In
the figure a possible ship route is visualized to describe the extent
of data that may need to be extracted from the raster.
 

.. figure:: humidity_world.png
   :align: center

   _`Figure 2`: Relative humidity raster band for one time instance.

`Figure 3`_ visualizes the two time dimensions that we have in our
data.  The first time dimension tells us what time instance a raster
applies to.  The second time dimension is the release time of a
forecast.  Usually there is overlap between different forecast
releases and ideally we would like to use the newest available
forecasts for each route time point.

The time axis also contains example route points.  When these points
are not exactly aligned with forecast time instances, we need to
interpolate to get proper estimates for forecasts.

.. figure:: forecasts.png
   :align: center

   _`Figure 3`: Many relative humidity rasters with bands
   corresponding to different time instances.  Red and green lines
   both denote possible collections of data matrices used for our
   optimizations.  First, red line denotes the data that is obtained
   in real-time at the start of the route.  Green line then denotes
   data where we have updated the last three matrices to more recent
   forecasts, which were not available at the start of the route.


.. _code-example:

Basic elements of our database solution
=======================================

In this section we show by a small example how we have built our
databases on NetCDF4 files which have been mounted to a local
filesystem.  The following code is far from production ready, but it
should highlight some of the design choices we have made.

The following code moderately exploits NumPy_, Scipy_, and Pandas_.
If you are unfamiliar with these numerical tools, you probably have to
consult their documentation to understand the details.

.. _NumPy: http://www.numpy.org/
.. _SciPy: http://scipy.org/scipylib/
.. _Pandas: http://pandas.pydata.org/

In this example we use only one NetCDF4 file for `air temperature`_.
If you wish to run the code, you have to include this file in your
current working directory.  This particular data file isn't used in
our products, but the structure resembles that of our actual data.

.. _`air temperature`:
   ftp://ftp.cdc.noaa.gov/Datasets/ncep.reanalysis/pressure/air.2015.nc

We start the example by importing the numerical tools and a class that
can open NetCDF4 files for reading:

.. code-block:: python
   
   import numpy as np
   import pandas as pd
   from scipy.interpolate import interpn
   from netCDF4 import Dataset

Then let's define what the final output will be like.  We want to
create a database class from which we can request forecast data for a
ship's route.  We would like the database to provide us with regularly
gridded data so that we can then easily use SciPy's interpolator
estimate values for the route.  Expressed in code:

.. code-block:: python
   
   if __name__ == '__main__':
       
       # "random" coordinates
       lat = np.r_[30., 30.2, 30.4, 30.9]
       lon = np.r_[150.1, 150.2, 151.5, 152.]
       # hours since 1800-01-01 00:00:0.0
       time = np.r_[1884649., 1884655., 1884660., 1884670.]
       route = np.c_[time, lat, lon]

       # Example data contains variable 'air' for air temperature
       db = Database()
       clipped_data, axis_points = db.clip_data(route, 'air')

       # Flip latitude axis because that is not ascending in our data
       axis_points[1].sort()
       clipped_data = clipped_data[:,::-1,:]

       interpolated_values = interpn(axis_points, clipped_data, route)  


Above, clipping the data means that we extract a "cube" of raster
points so that all the three dimensional route points are contained
within the cube's outermost cells.  ``axis_points`` is then a tuple of
three arrays which contain time, latitude and longitude values that
correspond to the cells inside the cube.

Now we can continue implementing the actual database class:

.. code-block:: python
   
   class Database(object):

       def clip_data(self, route, varname):
           """Read subsets of data raster data to cover all requested points

           """
           # Vectors that define the route
           time, lat, lon = route.T
           # Open required files and group time instances according to them
           datasets = self._get_datasets(time, varname)
           # Loop over files and time vectors corresponding to them 
           for ds, t in datasets:
               clipped, axis_points = _clip_one_dataset(ds, varname, lat, lon, t)
               ds.close()

           # We should concatenate all clipped data according to time axis.
           # We should also concatenate all time axis axis_points.
           # Latitude and longitude axis_points are the same in all.

           return clipped, axis_points

       def _get_datasets(self, time, varname):
           """Find files from which to get variable for requested times

	   All database files contain different time instances.

           """
           # Return only one example data set, which contains all 
           # times that can requested
           return [(Dataset('air.2015.nc'), time)]


Nothing complex there.  The idea in ``clip_data`` is that the database
instance first looks at the requested times and then opens
corresponding NetCDF4 files.  Then the vector for requested times is
divided according to the opened files.

Now the index of database files is completely missing, as well as the
logic that decides which files to open.  These are minor
implementation details which we have chosen to skip here.  Instead, we
just open one file in the current working directory.  In reality the
different clipped data should also be concatenated together, but that
is another detail which we skip for simplicity.

The function that hasn't yet been defined, ``_clip_one_dataset``,
accesses only the needed values in NetCDF4 files and returns those as
its first return value.  The second return values contains axis values
which correspond to the returned point values.  In this example the
function is defined as follows:

.. code-block:: python
   
   def _clip_one_dataset(dataset, varname, lat, lon, time):
       """Find all NetCDF4 file values that cover the requested axis values 

       """
       def get_required(axis_name, requested_values):
           axis = pd.Series(dataset.variables[axis_name][:])
           axis_step = abs(axis.iloc[1] - axis.iloc[0])
           return axis[(axis > requested_values.min() - axis_step)
                       & (axis < requested_values.max() + axis_step)]

       required_lat = get_required('lat', lat)
       required_lon = get_required('lon', lon)
       required_time = get_required('time', time)

       clipped = dataset.variables[varname][required_time.index,
                                            0,  # height axis 
                                            required_lat.index, 
                                            required_lon.index]

       axis_points = (required_time.values, 
                      required_lat.values, 
                      required_lon.values)

       return clipped, axis_points

The function first defines a smaller function which finds sub-sets of
axes with that surround requested axis values.  After the sub-sets are
obtained, the corresponding forecast values are extract using the
``Dataset`` API.  Here there is an extra axis variables, height, which
was also contained in this example data.

And that's it!  There is our rudimentary database implementation.


Discussion: another way to build similar functionality
======================================================

In this post we have discussed building a simple custom geospatial
database on top of NetCDF4 files.  Most of the discussion has been
around only one aspect of the database: how data can be extracted from
files and returned through a simple Python API.  In real-life many
other problems have to be solved by our database: indexing of data
files for effective access, different query functionalities, error
handling, different APIs (e.g., REST over web), and so forth.

Any unnecessary custom building blocks are worrying as they bring
about maintenance burden, and their development is costly at any rate.
One existing database that we have considered for our data is
`PostgreSQL`_ with `PostGIS`_ extension that supports all kinds of
geospatial data.  PostGIS project is part of `OSGeo`_ foundation which
provides all kinds of tools for Geospatial data processing and
analysis.  Some other OSGeo libraries are already incorporated into
our codebase.

.. _`PostgreSQL`: http://www.postgresql.org/

.. _`PostGIS`: http://postgis.net/
 
.. _`OSGeo`: http://www.osgeo.org/

PostGIS defines a raster data type in which our forecast data could be
expressed.  Basically, PostGIS divides a raster into tiles that
describe different part of a globe and puts those tiles into one
database table.  Rasters can also be imported conveniently into the
database with another OSGeo library, `GDAL`_ (which also provides nice
Python bindings).

.. _`GDAL`: http://www.gdal.org/

However, there doesn't seem to be a standard way of representing
temporal rasters in PostGIS.  For instance, with the GDAL import tool
temporal metadata is completely ignored.  Thus it would require some
additional work to maintain the temporal metadata in the database.
Some work would also go into maintaining a master table that
cross-references to tables of different variables and forecast release
times.  Also, we would still have to build somewhere the logic of
choosing the rasters with right time instances and forecast release
times. 

Admittedly, PostGIS would provide a suite of other functionalities
that might be convenient in the future.  However, so far the benefits
haven't outweighted the flexibility provided by our custom database
implementation.

.. 

    *Jarno Saarim√§ki is a senior research engineer in Algorithm
    Development team at Eniram.  Jarno's educational background is in
    numerical analysis and geoscience but he is also an avid
    programmer.  Outside of work he enjoys hiking in nature, reading
    historical books, and playing board games.*
